Token based authentication is a very powerful way of authenticating clients.
Basic auth is considered bad practice for every single request that a client makes.
They need to include their username and their password sending over passwords as not recommended.
If you're building an API, do not use basic authentication.
Now token based authentication with JWT is much more secure.
It is the recommended approach because instead of passing in your credentials sensitive information,
you're passing in a JSON web token.
The API is going to check if the token is valid, and if so, it's going to grant the user access.
JWT authentication is a very simple mechanism, but it's also very powerful and secure.
That's why in this lesson we're going to discuss the intricacies of token based authentication.
Now our implementation of token based authentication is going to involve three different pathways.
Let's start with pathway number one, which is signing up.
In Pathway one, the user makes a post request to the path slash register.
Every request that we make to the application will go through the security filter chain.
One of these security rules permits all requests on the path slash register without the need for authentication
or authorization.
So this request is going to skip all of the other filters and it's going to automatically get processed.
The credentials that the user passes in will get stored inside of a database, but you'll remember that
we never, ever store passwords in plaintext.
The password is going to be encrypted using a one way hash function, and this means the password cannot
be restored to its original state.
And that's fine because from the server side, we do not care about what the password is.
We only care that the user themselves know it.
So that's your first pathway.
And pathway number two is after the user signs up, they can now authenticate.
So the user will make a request on the path slash authenticate passing in their credentials.
And this is going to be the last time that the user will include their password in a request.
So as always, the request goes through the security filter chain and because their request is being
made on the path slash authenticate, our authentication filter is going to be programmed to get invoked
on a request that matches this path.
The filter is going to use the hashing algorithm to encrypt the password that they pass in, and if
there is no match, then they provided invalid credentials befitting a401.
But if they pass in a password, that is correct.
Then after we apply the hashing algorithm, it should match a password that we have in our records.
And if it does, we send back a status of 200.
And the response that we send back is also going to include a JWT token, and that's pathway number
two.
But what is the significance of the JWT token that we sent back?
Why is it important?
JWT stands for JSON web token and it consists of a header payload and a signature.
The header is metadata that describes the type of token that's being sent.
For example, JWT and the header also includes the algorithm that is used to secure it.
The field in our header states that this JWT token was given a digital signature using an algorithm
of H 256.
There are many, many algorithms that you can use, but overall the header just describes metadata and
the header of a JWT is based 64 encoded.
Now the payload is the more relevant data that relates to the user.
For example, a subject that stores the client's username.
A name field that stores their name.
And the more data that you include in your payload, the bigger the JWT.
The payload of a JWT is also a base 64 encoded.
So when you look at a JWT, what comes before the first dot is the Header Bay 64 encoded.
What comes after the first dot is the payload also base64 encoded?
And one thing I really, really, really want to emphasize is to never store sensitive data inside the
payload or the header.
They can be very easily decoded by anybody.
I will do so in front of you right now.
This was the header that I just showed you.
This was the payload.
I'm just going to use some random website to decode it.
And here we see the corresponding JSON.
Anyways, moral of the story is that your header and your payload, they are not secure.
Now in the third section of your JWT, your assigning algorithm is going to produce a digital signature
that combines the header, the body and a secret key that nobody knows about except for the API because
nobody knows what the secret key is.
Provided that you use a very strong secret that nobody can ever guess, the digital signature that combines
the header payload and secret is going to be impossible to decode.
So a JSON web token, as you can see, is composed of three different parts.
The first segment is your header base 64 encoded.
The second segment is your payload also bay 64 encoded, and the third segment is your signature, which
results from the use of a signing algorithm that combines the header payload and a secret key that no
one can ever guess in order to produce a signature that is virtually impossible to decode.
So when a user logs in successfully, we're going to send them back a signed JSON web token.
That's pathway number two, which brings us to pathway number three, authorizing requests.
So now that the user has been given an access token, they can use that token as evidence that they've
been authenticated.
And our job is to make sure that the token that they're giving us is valid.
And so now they can use this token to make requests.
As always, the request is going to get caught by the security filter chain.
The user isn't signing up.
So we skip this, they're not authenticating.
So this filter is skipped.
And finally the request travels to the JWT authorization filter.
Inside JWT authorization, our filter is going to make sure that the JWT they're sending us is valid
before authorizing them to make a request.
It's going to say, okay, this is the header, this is the payload.
It, and only it knows the secret key.
Then what it's going to do is use the same algorithm to produce a test signature that combines the header
body and the secret that nobody knows about.
If the test signature matches the signature that they sent us, then it's obvious that they're using
a valid token that we gave them.
Now let's assume that somebody tries to tamper with a JWT token.
They try to change the payload.
And so the base 64 encoding of the payload is going to change, of course.
But the thing is, they will never know what the resulting signature should be because they don't know
the secret key when the API tries to verify the token.
It's going to extract the header, it's going to extract the payload it and only it knows the secret
key.
The test signature that it produces is a combination of the header payload and secret, and it's not
going to match what they're sending us.
Which means that their token is not valid.
We send them back a 403 because they are not authorized to perform that request.
So as you can see, JWT authentication is so simple and yet so effective.
Assuming the validation process were to work, then our API is going to set the authentication on the
security context.
Holder.
All I want you to know is the security context holder is worth spring security stores the details of
who is authenticated.
Once we do that, we've basically indicated that a user has been successfully authenticated.
And so what follows is actually executing their request and sending back a response.
And that's pathway number three.
So to recap, pathway number one is registration.
The user makes a request to sign up.
We have a security rule that permits all requests on the path register without the need to authenticate
and the request is going to get executed and their credentials will get saved.
Pathway number two is authentication.
The user is going to try to log in with the correct credentials.
The request is going to get caught in the authentication filter.
And if their credentials match what we have in our records, then they are going to be granted a JWT
token.
The user's request is now going to include a JWT token in the header.
The JWT authorization filter is going to catch the request and try to verify the token that they provided.
So it's going to use the same algorithm to produce a test signature that combines the header of the
JWT, the payload, a secret key that nobody knows about.
And if the token happens to be valid, then we're going to set the authentication on the security context
holder.
Once we do that, we're basically indicating that the user's information, who we just saved inside
the context folder, they have been successfully authenticated.
So what follows is authorizing the request and sending back a response.
And that's pathway number three.